Create 2023-07-14-devx.md (#65)
input-output-hk/engineering: blog/2023-11-13-devx.md

---
slug: 2023-11-13-devx
title: The IOG Developer`s Experience Shell
authors: [yvan]
tags: [devx, haskell.nix, hix, iogx, nix]
---

# The IOG Developer's Experience Shell

> The IOG's Developer Experience Shell, or `DevX` for short, is an opinionated development environment tailored for Haskell. Built on top of Nix expressions, it provides a reproducible and seamless, full-featured developer shell with tools such as `cabal-install`, `ghc`, `hls`, and `hlint`. `DevX` is built upon the battle-tested `haskell.nix`, a framework for building Haskell packages with Nix, but that knowing Nix isn't a prerequisite to read the post unless the last `hix` section. In short, `haskell.nix` turns your Cabal or Stack project and its dependencies into a Nix expression. We will explain how to use `haskell.nix` on its own using `hix` in the last section.

Reviewer: packages with Nix, but that knowing Nix 
 ->  packages with Nix. Knowing Nix

Reviewer: post unless the -> post except for the

>  But why Nix? Haskell developers often encounter the need for distinct environments per project. While solutions like stack resolvers and cabal project files address some concerns, they often fall short in terms of environment isolation. E.g., a Cabal project file could not be enough, because external (non-Haskell / system) dependencies need to be tracked too (that's exactly what Nix does), and could lead to inconsistent (non-reproducibles) builds. For instance, working on the Cardano performance regression while migrating from GHC 8.10 to 9.2, this required different toolchains. And, addressing this without `nix`would have been an absolute mess... With the `DevX` shell and `direnv`, you can achieve seamless transitions between projects. To illustrate, consider:

Reviewer: without `nix`would -> without `nix` would

```shell
cd project1    # loading project1/.envrc
ghc --version  # 8.10
cd ../project2 # unloading project1/.envrc and loading project2/.envrc
ghc --version  # 9.2
```

> Nix achieves reproducibility by managing the complete dependencies graph (the _closure_) of a project, this also make it a great candidate as a cross-compilation framework! While this will not be discussed in this article, it worth noticing this is one of the main reason of why we love it at IOG. Other challenges solved by Nix are: How do we sync workspaces to make sure we're all dealing with the same technical stack? How do we make sure that Developer A can reuse the work of Developer B? One last way of introducing Nix is to say that it ensure that your developer environment respect a _semantic contract_. Like you can write a program that precisely and accurately states a meaning of some thing (e.g., the meaning of `2 + 2` _is_ the symbol `4`), with Nix you get a semantic contract for, e.g. in our case, a _shell closure_, which means a developer environment.

Author: Agree, this was based on a suggestion made by @doyougnu

> Nix achieve reproducibility by managing the complete dependencies graph (the _closure_) of a project, this also make it a great candidate as a cross-compilation framework! While this will not be discussed in this article, it worth noticing this is one of the main reason of why we love it at IOG. Other challenges solved by Nix are: How do we sync workspaces to make sure we're all dealing with the same technical stack? How do we make sure that Developer A can reuse the work of Developer B? One last way of introducing Nix is to say that it ensure that your developer environment respect a _semantic contract_. Like you can write a program that precisely and accurately states a meaning of some thing (e.g., the meaning of `2 + 2` _is_ the symbol `4`), with Nix you get a semantic contract for, e.g. in our case, a _shell closure_, which means a developer environment.

Reviewer: Nix achieve reproducibility -> Nix achieves reproducibility

> So, to sum up, Nix is the tool that let you write reproducible, seamless and correct developer enviroments, and `DevX` shell is our opiniated definition on how to pack it with tools such as it is full-featured for Haskell development. This article aims to give you a technical deep dive on how to use the `DevX` shell (and other IOG Nix-related projects such as IOGx flakes' framework and `hix` CLI tool) in your own Haskell project. By the end of the following section you should be able setup it in few steps, even in your Github Action CI or GitHub CodeSpace developer environment!

Reviewer 2: `IOGx`?

Author: This is a framework developed by @zeme-wana, he wrote a section about it :)

> So, to sum up, Nix is the tool that let you write reproducible, seamless and correct developer enviroments, and `DevX` shell is our opiniated definition on how to pack it with tools such as it is full-featured for Haskell development. This article aims to give you a technical deep dive on how to use the `DevX` shell (and other IOG Nix-related projects such as IOGx flakes' framework and `hix` CLI tool) in your own Haskell project. By the end of the following section you should be able setup it in few steps, even in your Github Action CI or GitHub CodeSpace developer environment!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, to sum up, Nix is the tool that let you write reproducible, seamless and correct developer enviroments, and `DevX` shell is our opiniated definition on how to pack it with tools such as it is full-featured for Haskell development. This article aims to give you a technical deep dive on how to use the `DevX` shell (and other IOG Nix-related projects such as IOGx flakes' framework and `hix` CLI tool) in your own Haskell project. By the end of the following section you should be able to setup it in few steps, even in your Github Action CI or GitHub CodeSpace developer environment!
```

## Getting started with `DevX` Shell

> The `DevX` GitHub repository provides a comprehensive [README](https://github.com/input-output-hk/devx#readme) that documents the different outputs that its `flake.nix` provides. But, as this article assumes you might have not so much knowledge of how to deal with Nix, we will quickly discuss three ergonomic ways of using this tool with no Nix knowledge required.

Reviewer: But, as this article assumes you might have not so much knowledge of how to deal with Nix
-> As this article assumes no prior knowledge of Nix

> You still need to ensure that [Nix is installed](https://nixos.org/download) on your machine. Then, You need Nix configured with `experimental-features = [ "nix-command" "flakes" ];` (details can be found at the [NixOS Wiki](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes)). 

Reviewer: We need to ensure Nix is installed and configured with ...

> **Side note:** In this article we will try to keep our use of the [Nix jargon](https://nixionary.org/) to the bare minimum required, but some concepts might still be needed to fully appreciate the last part of this article (about `hix`), here's a [little refresher in case of need](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gUjvnZ9ZwMs).

### Philosophy and Usage

> The `DevX` shell approach is a one shell fits most. This means it isn't the most minimalistic method for building a Haskell project with Nix, but it aims to be the most robust and generic approach. The `DevX` shell, built on top of `haskell.nix`, heavily utilizes IFD (Import From Derivation). Consequently, it can't be used as a build framework for distributing projects on `nixpkgs`. In such cases, you might prefer using [`haskellPackages.mkDerivation`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#haskell-mkderivation).

Reviewer 2: Move the part about IFD to a footnote, you just wrote that nix jargon would be avoided.

```suggestion
The `DevX` shell approach is a one shell fits most. This means it isn't the most minimalist method for building a Haskell project with Nix, but it aims to be the most robust and generic approach. 
```

> The `DevX` shell approach is a "one shell fits all" solution, IOG's project needs. This means it isn't the most minimalistic method for building a Haskell project with Nix, but it aims to be the most robust and generic approach. The `DevX` shell, built on top of `haskell.nix`, heavily utilizes IFD (Import From Derivation). Consequently, it couldn't be use as a build framework for distributing projects on `nixpkgs`. In such cases, you might prefer using [`haskellPackages.mkDerivation`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#haskell-mkderivation).

Reviewer: one shell fits all" solution, IOG's project needs. -> one shell fits most

Reviewer: it couldn't be use -> it can't be used

> To start using the IOG DevX shell in your Haskell project, simply run `nix develop github:input-output-hk/devx#ghc96` within your Haskell project's folder! This will spawn a developer shell, within you can proceed with your usual Haskell tools and development workflow; for instance, use `cabal build` to build your project. For instance:

Reviewer: within -> within which

the package needs to specify at least 'cabal-version: >= 1.8'.
Configuring hello-1.0.0.2...
Preprocessing executable 'hello' for hello-1.0.0.2..
Building executable 'hello' for hello-1.0.0.2..
[1 of 1] Compiling Main             ( src/hello.hs, /home/yvan/hello-1.0.0.2/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.6.3/hello-1.0.0.2/build/hello/hello-tmp/Main.o )
[2 of 2] Linking /home/yvan/hello-1.0.0.2/dist-newstyle/build/x86_64-linux/ghc-9.6.3/hello-1.0.0.2/build/hello/hello
Hello, World!
```

However, before discussing various use cases of `DevX` shell (with `direnv`, GitHub Action and Codespaces), let's take a quick detour to highlight that the developer shell's closure (all the Nix derivations it depends on) is quite large. To address this, some strategies have been developed to ensure it's quick to bootstrap the `DevX` shell.

### Benchmarking

We developed a strategy to speed up the overall download and evaluation time of our big Nix closure, we store it as an archive on GitHub package index, and then import all the derivations at once rather than letting `nix-daemon` evaluating and dowloading each store path separetly.

> To showcase the efficiency and speed that our download closure hack brings compared to a call to `nix develop`, we'll present a short benchmarking comparison that highlight a roughtly x2 speed up improvement!

Reviewer: closure hack -> closure approach

if ! has nix_direnv_version || ! nix_direnv_version 2.3.0; then
  source_url "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nix-community/nix-direnv/2.3.0/direnvrc" "sha256-Dmd+j63L84wuzgyjITIfSxSD57Tx7v51DMxVZOsiUD8="
fi
# https://github.com/input-output-hk/devx Slightly opinionated shared GitHub Action for Cardano-Haskell projects
use flake "github:input-output-hk/devx#ghc8107"
```

`DevX` supports a variety of compiler versions, typically the latest for each series from 8.10 to latest. Along with the core GHC version, [it also offers various flavours, denoted as suffixes to the compiler names](https://github.com/input-output-hk/devx#compilers-and-flavours).

The `nix-direnv` prefix is not necessary, but it's a good way to prevent Nix from garbage collecting your shell while the directory exists!

### GitHub Action

We also provide a `DevX` GitHub Action, leveraging a unique technique of pre-evaluating the closure of the development environment, compressing it, and uploading it to `ghcr.io`.
This approach drastically reduces the instantiation time of the developer shell, and will talk about it a bit more in details later in this article.

> Here's how you might utilize the DevX GitHub Action in your workflow:

Reviewer: to do what exactly? We are picking 8107 and a windows cross compiler on linux, why do we choose `iog`? What is the result we obtain from that GHA? This needs to be explained.

```yaml
- name: Build
  uses: input-output-hk/actions/devx@latest
  with:
    platform: 'x86_64-linux'
    target-platform: '-windows'
    compiler-nix-name: 'ghc8107'
    minimal: false
    iog: true
- name: Build
  shell: devx {0}
  run: |
    cabal update
    cabal build
```

### VSCode DevContainer and GitHub CodeSpace

> Finally, we also offer support for VSCode DevContainers and GitHub CodeSpaces.

Reviewer: Does not answer _why_ do I want to have this? Where is this useful?

### Getting Started with IOGx

Kick-start your project with IOGx by running the following command:
```
yvan@X230 ~/iogx-demo % nix flake init --template github:input-output-hk/iogx#vanilla
wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/nix/outputs.nix
wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/nix/shell.nix
wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/nix
wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/flake.nix
Flake Template for Vanilla Projects
    Open flake.nix to get started.
```
This command generates a `flake.nix` and a `nix` folder containing various file templates.

The next steps involve populating the templates in the `nix` folder and `flake.nix` itself.

### IOGx Features

IOGx comes packed with numerous [features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/iogx#2-features) that enhance the Haskell development process.

To delve deeper into IOGx and its API, refer to the comprehensive [API Reference](https://github.com/input-output-hk/iogx/blob/main/doc/api.md). IOGX aims to facilitate a pleasant and efficient development process for Haskell projects at IOG, minimizing the need for extensive Nix language knowledge.

## Hix

> Hix is a command-line tool designed to facilitate the addition of `haskell.nix` support to existing Haskell projects.

Reviewer: Does not answer: when do I want to use hix, rather than writing a flake by hand? What problem does it exactly solve that I have?

### Installing Hix

Hix can be installed in your `PATH` (by adding it to `~/.nix-profile/bin`) with the following command:
```
nix-env -iA hix -f https://github.com/input-output-hk/haskell.nix/tarball/master
```

To update Hix to the latest version, simply run `hix update`.

### Using Hix Commands

Commands like `hix develop`, `hix flake`, `hix build`, and `hix run` work similarly to their Nix counterparts. However, instead of utilizing the `flake.nix`, a boilerplate Haskell.nix `flake.nix` file is added to `.hix-flake/flake.nix`.

Once this step is done, you can execute commands without the need for `hix init`:
```
hix develop
hix flake show
hix build .#hello:exe:hello
hix run .#hello:exe:hello
```

### Using `hix-shell` and `hix-build`

The `hix-shell` and `hix-build` commands emulate the behaviour of `nix-build` and `hix-shell` if a boilerplate `default.nix` and `shell.nix` were present. These commands are executed as follows:
```
hix-shell --run 'cabal build all'
hix-build -A hsPkgs.hello.components.exes.hello
```

## Final Thoughts

> ...

Reviewer: As we've seen the suite of tools we've developed around nix, and haskell.nix at IOG provide a fully featured set of tools from running reproducible adhoc (DevX) build environments locally, to running them in CI either via GHA or nix based CI systems (via haskell.nix and IOGx) as appropriate, and extending this to in-browser development environment with Developer Containers / CodeSpaces. 

Something along those lines

---

> slug: 2023-11-13-devx

Author: Do not forget to change the slug and rename the file according to publication date

```yaml
- name: Build
  uses: input-output-hk/actions/devx@latest
  with:
    platform: 'x86_64-linux'
    target-platform: '-windows'
    compiler-nix-name: 'ghc8107'
    minimal: false
    iog: true
- name: Build
  shell: devx {0}
  run: |
    cabal update
    cabal build
```

### VSCode DevContainer and GitHub CodeSpace

Finally, we also offer support for VSCode DevContainers and GitHub CodeSpaces.
To make the DevX developer shell available in a VSCode DevContainer or GitHub CodeSpace, simply add a file named `.devcontainer/devcontainer.json` with the following content:
```json
{
   "image":"ghcr.io/input-output-hk/devx-devcontainer:ghc8107",
   "customizations":{
      "vscode":{
         "extensions":[
            "haskell.haskell"
         ],
         "settings":{
            "haskell.manageHLS":"PATH"
         }
      }
   }
}
```
You can follow the [Microsoft tutorial](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/devcontainers/tutorial) to set-up your VSCode local DevContainer or you can give it a try by [opening a GitHub Codespace](https://codespaces.new/input-output-hk/cardano-base?quickstart=1) on [`cardano-base`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-base) repository!

> ## IOGx: A Flake Template for Haskell Projects at IOG
> 
> IOGx is a flake template that offers a development experience for Haskell projects at IOG. Its vision is to provide a JSON-like, declarative interface to Nix, enabling developers unfamiliar with the Nix language to maintain and enhance the Nix sources independently with minimal effort. This is motivate by the current fact that the learning curve for Nix is steep and the documentation is not yet as beginner friendly than it could be.
> 
> ### Getting Started with IOGx
> 
> Kick-start your project with IOGX by running the following command:
> ```
> yvan@X230 ~/iogx-demo % nix flake init --template github:input-output-hk/iogx
> 
> wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/nix/outputs.nix
> wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/nix/shell.nix
> wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/nix
> wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/flake.nix
> 
> Flake Template for Vanilla Projects
> 
>     Open flake.nix to get started.
> 
> ```
> This command generates a `flake.nix` and a `nix` folder containing various file templates.
> These files form the *filesystem-based* API of IOGX.
> 
> The next steps involve populating the templates in the `nix` folder, leaving `flake.nix` mostly untouched.
> Based on the contents of the `nix` folder, IOGX populates your flake outputs.
> 
> ### IOGx Features
> 
> IOGx comes packed with numerous features that enhance the Haskell development process:
> 
> - **GHC Build Matrices**: IOGx enables defining a set of GHC versions, for each of which it generates `devShells`, `packages`, `apps`, `checks`, and `hydraJobs`. These outputs also include profiled builds and Windows cross-compiled builds.
> 
> - **Extensible Development Shells**: Every `devShell` comes with a complete Haskell toolchain that can be easily extended with new packages, custom scripts, environment variables, and hooks.
> 
> - **Automatic Hydra Jobset**: By default, your `hydraJobs` will include every Haskell component in your project. Test suites will run in CI automatically.
> 
> - **Easy Code Formatting**: IOGx employs [`pre-commit-hooks`](https://github.com/cachix/pre-commit-hooks.nix) for source tree formatting. These hooks are easily configurable and run automatically in CI unless explicitly disabled.
> 
> - **Read The Docs Support**: If your project requires a [Read The Docs](https://readthedocs.org) site, IOGX will include the necessary tools and scripts and add the relevant derivations to CI.
> 
> To delve deeper into IOGx and its API, refer to the comprehensive [API Reference](https://github.com/input-output-hk/iogx#3-api-reference). IOGX aims to facilitate a pleasant and efficient development process for Haskell projects at IOG, minimizing the need for extensive Nix language knowledge.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## IOGx: Flake Templates for Projects at IOG

IOGx is a Nix library of functions and templates for structuring your Nix code and comes with a number of common DevX facilities to help develop your project. Its vision is to provide a JSON-like, declarative interface to Nix, enabling developers unfamiliar with the Nix language to maintain and enhance the Nix sources independently with minimal effort. This is motivated by the current fact that the learning curve for Nix is steep and the documentation is not yet as beginner friendly than it could be.

### Getting Started with IOGx

Kick-start your project with IOGx by running the following command:
```
yvan@X230 ~/iogx-demo % nix flake init --template github:input-output-hk/iogx#vanilla
wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/nix/outputs.nix
wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/nix/shell.nix
wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/nix
wrote: /Users/yvan/iogx-demo/flake.nix
Flake Template for Vanilla Projects
    Open flake.nix to get started.
```
This command generates a `flake.nix` and a `nix` folder containing various file templates.

The next steps involve populating the templates in the `nix` folder and `flake.nix` itself.

### IOGx Features

IOGx comes packed with numerous [features](https://github.com/input-output-hk/iogx#2-features) that enhance the Haskell development process.

To delve deeper into IOGx and its API, refer to the comprehensive [API Reference](https://github.com/input-output-hk/iogx/blob/main/doc/api.md). IOGX aims to facilitate a pleasant and efficient development process for Haskell projects at IOG, minimizing the need for extensive Nix language knowledge.
```
